>> Brian Holt: CSS Selectors and
the Cascade.
So now we're gonna talk about the C
part we're gonna answer our friend's
question which one wins?
Which is always a good question.
>> Brian Holt: So,
>> Brian Holt: The Cascade,
this is always just the part that I
get least excited to talk about, okay.
The cascade is gonna cause you so
many problems.
It's going to take years off your life.
[LAUGH] It's really cool,
you can see why they created it but
I've worked at enough
companies to see it used and
abused in so many terrible, terrible ways.
That's why I get a little stressed
out whenever I say the word cascade.
So,
>> Brian Holt: Let's
say I have two paragraphs,
must have broken this somewhere around.
But pretend this one's red and
pretend this one's green.
And I wanna make them
style different ways.
As you might imagine I might use
classes to differentiate the two.
That's what we talked about previously.
So I would say this one would be,
I don't know error text and
this would be success text or
something to that effect, right,
some semantic good name thereof.
So we did that with
the section on classes and
making sure that we've labeled
them well and things like that.
And we do a thing here like,
>> Brian Holt: This one would
be called branding and
this one would be called post title.
And this would have one set of styling.
And this would be another sort of styling.
>> Brian Holt: This is
what I'm saying here,
we're gonna be using the style tag here.
This is not typically how you would do it.
You would typically have a separate
CSS file and a separate HTML file.
But for instruction purposes,
we're just doing it all in one file, cool?
The other thing I will tell you is that
this style will bleed outside of this,
just so you know.
So, if I say all h1s on the page should
be,
>> Brian Holt: Orange,
this won't affect the entire page.
So just be aware that if you start
seeing things that look really
weird it's probably because you put
something in a code block somewhere.
Okay, so if I have an h1 here called
branding and an h1 here called
blog-post-title and I want this one
to be red and this one to be green.
This one I select branding and
this one I select blog post title.
The way that you differentiate
that I am asking for a class and
not for a tag is you put this period here.
This period before
the selector means class.
>> Brian Holt: So, yeah, just make sure
you remember that the period means class.
So if I wanna select the class
called branding, I do .branding.
Or if I wanna do blog post title,
it's .blog-post-title.
If I delete this dot,
it's gonna mess this up.
It's going to be looking literally for
a tag called branding,
which is not a real tag, but
that's what it's going to be looking for.
Does it make sense?
So .branding.
>> Brian Holt: So that's what you
look for, you look for the dot.
>> Brian Holt: Generally speaking
should you style on tags or classes?
Always style on classes,
don't style on tags.
Hardly ever, I would not suggest it.
The only time that I would suggest
styling on tags is if you literally
mean everything in this
document should look like this.
And a good example of that was,
if I'm doing a website like this one,
this Intro to Web Dev, and if I go look at
this, you'll notice that all of my all of
my anchor tags,
all of my links look the same.
That makes sense, because now I want
all anchor tags to look like that.
That would make sense for
me to style by a tag.
But I only wanna do that if I
literally mean every single one.
That make sense?
I would say that I'm giving mostly
my opinion on these things.
There might be people that disagree with
me but they would be wrong first of all.
[LAUGH] And second I don't think
it's actually that controversial.
I think most people would tell
you a relatively similar thing.
>> Brian Holt: So style by class.
That's just kind of a thing
that you wanna get used to.
Mostly you should be styling by classes.
>> Brian Holt: You will have a lot of
heartache that you'll accidentally
be styling things using tags that you can
avoid if you always style by classes.
It's just a better idea.
>> Brian Holt: Err on the side
of using classes too much.
If you're not sure one way or
the other just go with classes.
You might need like a tiny bit extra
writing but doing a tiny bit of extra
writing will save you a lot
of heartache in the long run.
>> Brian Holt: Cool,
any questions about that so far?
>> Brian Holt: Please.
>> Speaker 2: I see that
you're styling by class there.
Can you show us how you
would style by tag?
>> Brian Holt: Yeah,
you would just put h1 instead.
>> Speaker 2: With the dot?
>> Speaker 2: Okay.
>> Brian Holt: It's not gonna work for
other reasons.
>> Speaker 2: Okay.
>> Brian Holt: Which we'll get to
literally in the next section.
>> Speaker 2: Okay, I was just asking-
>> Brian Holt: You wondered why it
wouldn't work.
>> Speaker 2: Yeah,
it wasn't working with mine.
>> Brian Holt: Yeah,
there are reasons which we'll talk about.
But good question.
>> Brian Holt: Let's refresh this page,
I think I broke something.
Okay, that's an astute observation.
So, you can see here,
I was sitting on the beach in Sydney,
actually, when I was writing this section.
I was like, I wish I could stop here.
I can't.
[LAUGH] So this is the part where CSS,
this to me,
what we've done so far is pretty fun.
You just make a rule and
see change and it's kinda fun.
There's a thing called the cascade
that has bitten me in the ass so
many times that it just it's not fun.
So I'm going to invite you to
avoid using the cascade as much
as possible,
keep you CSS as simple as possible.
And avoid making it more and more complex.
And I'll give you some like war stories
and horror stories towards the end when
you understand a little bit
more what I'm talking about.
So the cascade.
Someone asked before what happens
basically if I have two conflicting
tags, right?
If I have two things that are both
saying the same thing one of
them has to win, right?
If I say this one says green and
this one says orange and
they both match which one wins?
Cuz it's either gonna be green or
it's gonna be orange.
It's not gonna be both, and it's not
gonna mix them, that would be way worse.
[LAUGH] So
you can be grateful it doesn't do that.
I should write a library that does that,
that sounds terrible.
[LAUGH] Okay, terrible ideas.
So if I have .title here,
.title here, I think I probably like
ruined the surprise so
far because I scrolled down far enough.
Which one wins and why?
Cuz these both are the same thing, right?
There's nothing preventing me from
putting .title on there twice.
Obviously green came out on top but why?
>> Speaker 2: Because it came last.
>> Brian Holt: It came last.
That's exactly the reason.
If these two are exactly the same,
so when two things
are considered equal in terms of
CSS the one that comes last wins.
Even if I had title and other title,
I'm not very creative right now.
>> Brian Holt: It's still
selecting by one class.
And it doesn't matter that
they're different in any respect.
They're both one class, so
therefore the one that comes last wins.
Good so far?
So when everything's considered equal,
the one that comes further down, wins.
>> Brian Holt: Cool, so when you have two
rules with the same class, it's legal.
I would not suggest it.
I can't see of any reason why you would
want to separate those things out,
but you can.
It's legal, just don't.
Which one gets applied?
It's the one that's on the bottom.
>> Brian Holt: It'd be the same if we
had two different h1 selectors as well.
So if this said h1 and this one said h1,
it would also be the one that came
lower that would win,
>> Brian Holt: Okay,
>> Brian Holt: Yeah, so
what I wanted to point out here is, so
yes these are two different classes here.
So title-2 and name brand-2,
but notice one thing, so
I have main brand here 2 which
is losing on red, right?
Because this one comes down so
this ends up being green, but
this one does not specify border, right?
So it does get a black border because it's
resolved on a property by property basis.
So this is 1px solid black.
Notice here that it does end
up having a black border.
I can even actually,
if I say border-style: dashed,
so you can see a little better.
>> Brian Holt: So I say up here 1px
solid black and I change it here.
So just the dashed part is being changed,
all right?
So it's even more granularly resolved.
Does that make sense?
So I'm just overriding the border style.
This is called the cascade.
Just so you know.
It's going through this cascading
effect of trying to resolve
the properties to kinda get down
to one resolution of style.
>> Brian Holt: So we're dancing
around this thing that is called and
again I hate this word, specificity.
[LAUGH] Like go around to
a hardened front end developer and
ask them what they think
about specificity.
And they'll just get this long glance,
this 10,000 foot glance,
all the stories I could tell you, right?
It's just like they've been to war or
something.
And you just end up
with these rats' nests,
I'm showing you here very,
very simple cases.
But imagine this 14 layers deep, and
you're trying to figure out where
the hell did this style come from.
That's why I'm telling you to keep
everything really, really simple.
Because the simpler you keep it the less
problems that you're gonna have with this.
And I have some bad examples
underneath here so you can see why.
>> Brian Holt: So let's keep going here.
We did that.
Now we're going to get
into multiple classes.
So I have title three here.
So this has title-3 and main-brand-3, but
now up here I have main-brand-3.title-3.
Which color wins?
Red, because it is more specific.
It has two classes,
this only has one class.
This one is therefore more specific,
and therefore wins.
This is the specificity part of this.
Now notice there is no space here
between 3 and .title, right?
That it's right there shoved together.
If I put a space there, I break it.
So need they need to be shoved together
and they're separated by a period.
>> Brian Holt: Cuz it's the main brand and
it's also the title classes,
both of those classes which it has.
>> Brian Holt: So
there's no space between them,
therefore it wins because
it has two classes.
Now keep in mind that this h1, down here,
has to match both of those classes.
It must have title-3, and
it must have main-brand-3.
Just to show you.
If this just has title-3,
>> Brian Holt: Notice it's green, because
it doesn't match the entire selector, so
it must match everything in the selector.
That make sense?
Okay,
>> Brian Holt: Next
steps here, h1 comes lower on the page.
And title-4, notice which one wins here.
Orange, why?
Because classes are more
specific than tags.
>> Brian Holt: Why, I don't know.
Why do we do anything?
[LAUGH] It just is.
So let me give you a little device to
see if this helps you kind of determine.
You can kind of think of it as being
a number where the first number is
how specific the tag part is, the second
number is how specific the class part is.
So I think they have it down here, yeah.
>> Brian Holt: So this has one class, so
it's ten specific and it has one tag so
it's one specific, right?
Whereas if they had like three
classes it'd be 30, right?
So you can think of this tens place
as being how many classes there are?
And the ones place of being
how many tags there are.
So if I had three classes,
that's 30, compared to five tags,
which is impossible, but
ignore that for a second.
The 30 would be bigger than the 5 so
therefore the classes would win.
Doesn't totally work out.
If I had 11 tags,
one class would be still more specific.
So it's just kind of like a mental device,
it's kind of imperfect.
But just think of classes
being more specific in text.
That's ultimately what I'm
trying to get at here.
>> Brian Holt: So let's move on and
just like get this even more complicated.
>> Brian Holt: So I have title-5,
name-brand-5, it's in h1.
h1.main-brand-5, main-brand-5-title-5,
and main-brand, so this one is one tag and
one class, two tags and
two classes in one class.
>> Brian Holt: So thinking about it,
this is one tag, this is 11, right?
This is 20, and this is one.
No, sorry, this is 10.
So therefore the one that was 20 wins,
right?
So the one with two classes so
therefore it becomes orange.
Does that make sense, okay.
>> Brian Holt: This is how you do tags and
classes together, right?
This is an h1, right?
Has no period in front of it and
then a .main-brand-5, right?
So that's how you get the tag and
selector together.
I will invite you to not do this.
This is usually not a good idea to
do the tags and classes together.
The reason being is it should
usually just be enough for
you have just main-brand-5,
that should be it.
And you shouldn't really
be mixing tags and classes.
If something is made for h1s,
it should always be in h1.
So you don't normally wanna
select h1s differently than h2s.
It wouldn't make a ton of sense for
me to have an h2-main-brand-5.
That's really strange, and
it's gonna be hard to follow when
you're trying to write this code later.
So I would stay away from that.
Again, just in general,
avoid styling by tag.
It's just not a good idea.